<div class="todo">

THIS IS SUPPOSED TO BE AN EXAMPLE. MODIFY IT ACCORDING TO YOUR NEEDS!

The document assumes you are using a source repository service that
promotes a contribution model similar to [GitHub's fork and pull request
workflow](https://guides.github.com/activities/forking/). While this is
true for the majority of services (like GitHub, GitLab, BitBucket), it
might not be the case for private repositories (e.g., when using
Gerrit).

Also notice that the code examples might refer to GitHub URLs or the
text might use GitHub specific terminology (e.g., *Pull Request* instead
of *Merge Request*).

Please make sure to check the document having these assumptions in mind
and update things accordingly.

</div>

<div class="todo">

Provide the correct links/replacements at the bottom of the document.

</div>

<div class="todo">

You might want to have a look on [PyScaffold's contributor's
guide](https://pyscaffold.org/en/stable/contributing.html),

especially if your project is open source. The text should be very
similar to this template, but there are a few extra contents that you
might decide to also include, like mentioning labels of your issue
tracker or automated releases.

</div>

# Contributing

Welcome to `aiida-c2sm` contributor's guide.

This document focuses on getting any potential contributor familiarized
with the development processes, but [other kinds of
contributions](https://opensource.guide/how-to-contribute) are also
appreciated.

If you are new to using [git](https://git-scm.com) or have never
collaborated in a project previously, please have a look at
[contribution-guide.org](https://www.contribution-guide.org/). Other
resources are also listed in the excellent [guide created by
FreeCodeCamp](https://github.com/FreeCodeCamp/how-to-contribute-to-open-source)[^1].

Please notice, all users and contributors are expected to be **open,
considerate, reasonable, and respectful**. When in doubt, [Python
Software Foundation's Code of
Conduct](https://www.python.org/psf/conduct/) is a good reference in
terms of behavior guidelines.

## Issue Reports

If you experience bugs or general issues with `aiida-c2sm`, please have
a look on the [issue
tracker](https://github.com/%3CUSERNAME%3E/aiida-c2sm/issues). If you
don't see anything useful there, please feel free to fire an issue
report.

<div class="tip">

<div class="title">

Tip

</div>

Please don't forget to include the closed issues in your search.
Sometimes a solution was already reported, and the problem is considered
**solved**.

</div>

New issue reports should include information about your programming
environment (e.g., operating system, Python version) and steps to
reproduce the problem. Please try also to simplify the reproduction
steps to a very minimal example that still illustrates the problem you
are facing. By removing other factors, you help us to identify the root
cause of the issue.

## Documentation Improvements

You can help improve `aiida-c2sm` docs by making them more readable and
coherent, or by adding missing information and correcting mistakes.

`aiida-c2sm` documentation uses
[Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/) as its main
documentation compiler. This means that the docs are kept in the same
repository as the project code, and that any documentation update is
done in the same way was a code contribution.

<div class="todo">

Don't forget to mention which markup language you are using.

e.g.,
[reStructuredText](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/)
or [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) with
[MyST](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/syntax.html)
extensions.

</div>

<div class="todo">

If your project is hosted on GitHub, you can also mention the following
tip:

<div class="tip">

<div class="title">

Tip

</div>

Please notice that the [GitHub web
interface](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files)
provides a quick way of propose changes in `aiida-c2sm`'s files. While
this mechanism can be tricky for normal code contributions, it works
perfectly fine for contributing to the docs, and can be quite handy.

If you are interested in trying this method out, please navigate to the
`docs` folder in the source
[repository](https://github.com/%3CUSERNAME%3E/aiida-c2sm), find which
file you would like to propose changes and click in the little pencil
icon at the top, to open [GitHub's code
editor](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/editing-files).
Once you finish editing the file, please write a message in the form at
the bottom of the page describing which changes have you made and what
are the motivations behind them and submit your proposal.

</div>

</div>

When working on documentation changes in your local machine, you can
compile them using `tox`\_:

    tox -e docs

and use Python's built-in web server for a preview in your web browser
(`http://localhost:8000`):

    python3 -m http.server --directory 'docs/_build/html'

## Code Contributions

<div class="todo">

Please include a reference or explanation about the internals of the
project.

An architecture description, design principles or at least a summary of
the main concepts will make it easy for potential contributors to get
started quickly.

</div>

### Submit an issue

Before you work on any non-trivial code contribution it's best to first
create a report in the [issue
tracker](https://github.com/%3CUSERNAME%3E/aiida-c2sm/issues) to start a
discussion on the subject. This often provides additional considerations
and avoids unnecessary work.

### Create an environment

Before you start coding, we recommend creating an isolated [virtual
environment](https://realpython.com/python-virtual-environments-a-primer/)
to avoid any problems with your installed Python packages. This can
easily be done via either `virtualenv`\_:

    virtualenv <PATH TO VENV>
    source <PATH TO VENV>/bin/activate

or [Miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html):

    conda create -n aiida-c2sm python=3 six virtualenv pytest pytest-cov
    conda activate aiida-c2sm

### Clone the repository

1.  Create an user account on GitHub if you do not already have one.

2.  Fork the project
    [repository](https://github.com/%3CUSERNAME%3E/aiida-c2sm): click on
    the *Fork* button near the top of the page. This creates a copy of
    the code under your account on GitHub.

3.  Clone this copy to your local disk:

        git clone git@github.com:YourLogin/aiida-c2sm.git
        cd aiida-c2sm

4.  You should run:

        pip install -U pip setuptools -e .

    to be able to import the package under development in the Python
    REPL.

    <div class="todo">

    if you are not using pre-commit, please remove the following item:

    </div>

5.  Install `pre-commit`\_:

        pip install pre-commit
        pre-commit install

    `aiida-c2sm` comes with a lot of hooks configured to automatically
    help the developer to check the code being written.

### Implement your changes

1.  Create a branch to hold your changes:

        git checkout -b my-feature

    and start making changes. Never work on the main branch!

2.  Start your work on this branch. Don't forget to add
    [docstrings](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/napoleon.html)
    to new functions, modules and classes, especially if they are part
    of public APIs.

3.  Add yourself to the list of contributors in `AUTHORS.rst`.

4.  When youâ€™re done editing, do:

        git add <MODIFIED FILES>
        git commit

    to record your changes in [git](https://git-scm.com).

    <div class="todo">

    if you are not using pre-commit, please remove the following item:

    </div>

    Please make sure to see the validation messages from `pre-commit`\_
    and fix any eventual issues. This should automatically use
    [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/stable/)/[black](https://pypi.org/project/black/)
    to check/fix the code style in a way that is compatible with the
    project.

    <div class="important">

    <div class="title">

    Important

    </div>

    Don't forget to add unit tests and documentation in case your
    contribution adds an additional feature and is not just a bugfix.

    Moreover, writing a [descriptive commit
    message](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit) is highly
    recommended. In case of doubt, you can check the commit history
    with:

        git log --graph --decorate --pretty=oneline --abbrev-commit --all

    to look for recurring communication patterns.

    </div>

5.  Please check that your changes don't break any unit tests with:

        tox

    (after having installed `tox`\_ with `pip install tox` or `pipx`).

    You can also use `tox`\_ to run several other pre-configured tasks
    in the repository. Try `tox -av` to see a list of the available
    checks.

### Submit your contribution

1.  If everything works fine, push your local branch to GitHub with:

        git push -u origin my-feature

2.  Go to the web page of your fork and click "Create pull request" to
    send your changes for review.

    <div class="todo">

    if you are using GitHub, you can uncomment the following paragraph

    Find more detailed information in [creating a
    PR](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request).
    You might also want to open the PR as a draft first and mark it as
    ready for review after the feedbacks from the continuous
    integration (CI) system or any required fixes.

    </div>

### Troubleshooting

The following tips can be used when facing problems to build or test the
package:

1.  Make sure to fetch all the tags from the upstream
    [repository](https://github.com/%3CUSERNAME%3E/aiida-c2sm). The
    command `git describe --abbrev=0 --tags` should return the version
    you are expecting. If you are trying to run CI scripts in a fork
    repository, make sure to push all the tags. You can also try to
    remove all the egg files or the complete egg folder, i.e., `.eggs`,
    as well as the `*.egg-info` folders in the `src` folder or
    potentially in the root of your project.

2.  Sometimes `tox`\_ misses out when new dependencies are added,
    especially to `setup.cfg` and `docs/requirements.txt`. If you find
    any problems with missing dependencies when running a command with
    `tox`\_, try to recreate the `tox` environment using the `-r` flag.
    For example, instead of:

        tox -e docs

    Try running:

        tox -r -e docs

3.  Make sure to have a reliable `tox`\_ installation that uses the
    correct Python version (e.g., 3.7+). When in doubt you can run:

        tox --version
        # OR
        which tox

    If you have trouble and are seeing weird errors upon running
    `tox`\_, you can also try to create a dedicated [virtual
    environment](https://realpython.com/python-virtual-environments-a-primer/)
    with a `tox`\_ binary freshly installed. For example:

        virtualenv .venv
        source .venv/bin/activate
        .venv/bin/pip install tox
        .venv/bin/tox -e all

4.  [Pytest can drop
    you](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/how-to/failures.html#using-python-library-pdb-with-pytest)
    in an interactive session in the case an error occurs. In order to
    do that you need to pass a `--pdb` option (for example by running
    `tox -- -k <NAME OF THE FALLING TEST> --pdb`). You can also setup
    breakpoints manually instead of using the `--pdb` option.

## Maintainer tasks

### Releases

<div class="todo">

This section assumes you are using PyPI to publicly release your
package.

If instead you are using a different/private package index, please
update the instructions accordingly.

</div>

If you are part of the group of maintainers and have correct user
permissions on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/), the following steps can be
used to release a new version for `aiida-c2sm`:

1.  Make sure all unit tests are successful.
2.  Tag the current commit on the main branch with a release tag, e.g.,
    `v1.2.3`.
3.  Push the new tag to the upstream
    [repository](https://github.com/%3CUSERNAME%3E/aiida-c2sm), e.g.,
    `git push upstream v1.2.3`
4.  Clean up the `dist` and `build` folders with `tox -e clean` (or
    `rm -rf dist build`) to avoid confusion with old builds and Sphinx
    docs.
5.  Run `tox -e build` and check that the files in `dist` have the
    correct version (no `.dirty` or [git](https://git-scm.com) hash)
    according to the [git](https://git-scm.com) tag. Also check the
    sizes of the distributions, if they are too big (e.g., \> 500KB),
    unwanted clutter may have been accidentally included.
6.  Run `tox -e publish -- --repository pypi` and check that everything
    was uploaded to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) correctly.

<div class="todo">

Please review and change the following definitions:

</div>

[^1]: Even though, these resources focus on open source projects and
    communities, the general ideas behind collaborating with other
    developers to collectively create software are general and can be
    applied to all sorts of environments, including private companies
    and proprietary code bases.
